Here we have an image of a redundant robot.
And this is a concept that we introduced in
the previous lecture.
This is a robot with a very large number of
degrees of freedom or joints.
We also introduced the concepts of task space
and configuration space.
Now the task space of this robot is a subset
of SE3 and that's exactly the same task space
as the Puma robot has, that is within a working
volume, it can move to a particular point
and achieve a particular end effector orientation.
However the configuration space of this robot
is much, much bigger.
We're assuming that this robot has got a hundred
joints, then its configuration space is R
to the 100, with a Puma robot with only 6
joints, it has got a configuration space of
R to the 6th.
The task space has got a dimension of 6, the
configuration space has got a dimension space
of 100.
So we could consider that six of those degrees
of freedom are used to control the position
and orientation of the end effector.
The other 94 degrees of freedom are used to
define an arbitrary shape for the robot arm,
so that we can independently control the position
and orientation of the end effector and the
path that the arm follows in order to get
from the base of the robot to the end effector.
When it comes to determining the inverse kinematics
then, we have a bit of a problem; there are
in fact an infinite number of sets of joint
angles and infinite number of robot configurations
that will lead to exactly the same end effector
pose.
In the case of the Puma robot, there were
six configurations that gave the same end
effector pose; for this robot there are an
infinite number.
To solve the inverse kinematics then for a
redundant robot, we have to rely on a numerical
solution.
We're going to do an example now with a redundant
robot and we're going to use a Toolbox model
called MDL Hyper 3D.
So this is a Hyper-redundant robot, in 3 dimensions
and I'm going to ask for a robot with 20 dimensions.
We can see that there is a new serial link
object in the workspace called H3D and if
we look at the parameters of the robot, we
can see that it has got 20 joints, each joint
is only 0.05 meters long.
Let's compute the inverse kinematics numerically
and we're going to apply the ikine method
on that particular object and I'm going to
pass in the pose that I want the robot to
adopt, that I have already defined and I'm
going to pass in the initial joint angles
and I'm going to use the workspace variable
QZ, that was defined by the script that created
the robot for me.
And here we have the solution.
We've computed a 20 element vector, which
are the joint angles necessary for this 20
joint robot to adopt the pose T2.
I can test the correctness of this by computing
the forward Kinematics for the set of joint
angles that I just computed and that's what
it looks like and this is the original pose
that I asked for.
So we can see that they are identical.
I can plot the configuration of the robot
at the set of joint angles computed by the
inverse kinematics and it looks something
like that.
Hold on so I can overlay on that now the original
pose that I asked for, which was in the workspace
variable T2.
And there we see that the end effector is
in the correct position and that it has the
correct orientation.